#+TITLE: Chapter 11: Option Price and Probability Duality

Here we derive the result that option prices determine entirely the risk-neutral distribution of $S_T$

* 11.1 Digitals and the Cumulative Distribution Function

** Result Price of a Digital Call Option

The price at time t of the digital call option struck at $K$ equals

$\lim\limits_{\lambda \to \infty} \lambda (C_K(t, T) - C_{K + \frac{1}{\lambda}}(t, T)) = - \frac{\delta C_K(t, T)}{\delta K}$

** Result Price of a Digital Call Option Using the Fundamental Theorem

Defining the payout at T of the digital call option to be

$D_K(T, T) = I\{S_T > K\}$

then by the fundamental theorem, $D_K(t, T)$, its price at time t, satisfies

$\frac{D_K(t, T)}{Z(t, T)} = E_*(\frac{D_K(T, T)}{Z(T, T)}) = E_*(I\{S_T > K\})) = P^*(S_T > K | S_T)$

The price of a digital option is thus simply the present value of the
probability of receiving a payout, namely the stock price being above
K at T.

Combining our results, we obtain

$P^*(S_T \leq K | S_t) = 1 + \frac{1}{Z(t, T)} \frac{\delta C_K(t, T)}{\delta K}$

For the Black-Scholes models, we obtain the result

$-\frac{\delta C_K(t, T)}{\delta K} = Z(t, T) \Phi(d_2)$

* 11.2 Butterflies and Risk-Neutral Density


#+DOWNLOADED: screenshot @ 2022-08-18 08:08:13
[[file:11.2_Butterflies_and_Risk-Neutral_Density/2022-08-18_08-08-13_screenshot.png]]


#+DOWNLOADED: screenshot @ 2022-08-18 08:07:48
[[file:11.2_Butterflies_and_Risk-Neutral_Density/2022-08-18_08-07-48_screenshot.png]]

For small $\frac{1}{\lambda}$

 $B_{K, \lambda}(t, T) = \frac{1}{\lambda} Z(t, T) f_{S_T|S_t}(x)$

The butterfly price equals the probability density times the
half-width of the small triangle, either side of $K = x$, or
equivalently, the probability of $S_T$ being in the interval $K \pm
1/\lambda$ multiplied by $Z(t, T)$.

By trading butterflies we are trading probability, in particular the
risk-neutral probabilities of possible states of the random variable
$S_T$.

If a trader's assessment of the actual probability of a possible state
of the world differs significantly from the risk-neutral probability
of that state implied by option prices, a trade opportunity arises.

* 11.3 Calls as Spanning Set

We can move from risk-neutral probabilities to call prices via the
fundamental theorem by:

$C_K(t, T) = Z(t, T)E_*((S_T - K)^+ | S_t)$

and we can move from call prices to the risk-neutral density via

$f_{S_T|S_t}(x) = \frac{1}{Z(t, T)}\frac{\delta^2 C_K(t, T)}{\delta K^2}$

Thus we have an elegant duality between the set of call prices with
maturity $T$ and the risk-neutral distribution of $S_T$.

The notion of calls as a spanning set can be seen as such:

Any option payout at time T can be replicated by a linear combination
of the ZCB, the stock and calls with strikes $K > 0$. We know that we
must be able to perform this replication since we are able to move
from call prices to the price of an arbitrary derivative contract with
payout $g(S_T)$ by the route:

call prices $\to$ risk-neutral density $\to$ $E_*(g(S_T))$

* 11.4 Implied Volatility

The Black-Scholes formula is a one to one function between volatility
and call price. In particular, given the observed call option price
$C_K(t, T)$, one can determine the volatility $\sigma_K$ that would
give this price when entered into the Black-Scholes formula. This is
known as *implied volatility*.

Different implied volatilities for different strikes are a
manifestation that the risk-neutral distribution for $S_T$ is not
lognormal. If it were lognormal, one volatility would determine option
prices for all strikes.

Practitioners use implied volatilities as an efficient way to capture
option prices and hence the risk-neutral distribution via

$\{\sigma_K ; K > 0\} \iff \{C_K(t, T); K > 0\} \iff$ risk-neutral distribution

The term *volatility skew* is used to describe the phenomenon that
$\sigma_K$ is not constant for all $K$, and hence that the
risk-neutral distribution is not lognormal.
