#+TITLE: Chapter 13: Cancellable Swaps and Bermudan Swaptions

Cancellable swaps can be European style with just one cancellation
date, Bermudan style with multiple cancellation dates, or American
style with continuous cancellation dates (which in practice usually
means daily).

* 13.1 European Cancellable Swaps

#+DOWNLOADED: screenshot @ 2022-08-21 16:16:24
[[file:13.1_European_Cancellable_Swaps/2022-08-21_16-16-24_screenshot.png]]

As a reminder:

#+begin_quote
A *payer swaption*, struck at K with expiry T on a swap from $T \to
T_n$,
is the option to pay fixed K and receive libor on the swap.
#+end_quote

#+begin_quote
A *receiver swaption* struct at K is the option to receive fixed K and
pay libor on the swap.
#+end_quote

Is there a value of $K^*$ of $K$ for which the cancellable swap has 0
value at T?  In the case of spot-starting swaps where $T = 0$, we call
$K^*$ the $T_n$ *noncall $T_j$ (European Cancellable) swap rate*,
"noncall" indicating it is not cancellable under $T_j$.

* 13.2 Callable Bonds

Corporations issuing fixed rate debt often use swaps to exchange the
fixed rate payments they are making on the bond for floating libor
payments. By swapping a fixed rate bond, the corporation ends up
paying an interest cost of libor plus or minus a spread.


#+DOWNLOADED: screenshot @ 2022-08-21 16:27:07
[[file:13.2_Callable_Bonds/2022-08-21_16-27-07_screenshot.png]]


The company may alternatively issue a callable bond, which they have
the option to buy back (or "call") from the investor at 100% of the
notional (or "par") at a fixed time $T_j$ before maturity. In a
similar manner to above, the company often will exchange these fixed
payments for libor payments using a cancellable swap.


#+DOWNLOADED: screenshot @ 2022-08-21 16:28:41
[[file:13.2_Callable_Bonds/2022-08-21_16-28-41_screenshot.png]]

Why would a company issue a callable bond as opposed to a regular
bond? It essentially allows them to have the option to pre-pay off the
bond without getting locked in to a high interest rate for a long
period of time. Something like refinancing.

* 13.3 Bermudan Swaptions

A *$T_0$ into $T_n - T_0$ Bermudan payer swaption* is the option at each $T_i$ to pay $K$ and receive libor from $T_i$ to $T_n$ for $i = 0, ..., n - 1$. If the swaption is not exercised at $T_i$, then the option continues. Once the option is exercised at a particular $T_i$, all subsequent options disappear. That is, there are many exercise dates but only one option.


#+DOWNLOADED: screenshot @ 2022-08-21 17:34:17
[[file:13.3_Bermudan_Swaptions/2022-08-21_17-34-17_screenshot.png]]

** Result

$C_K(t, T_0, T_n) \geq B_K(t, T_0, T_n) \geq \max\limits_{0 \leq i \leq n - 1} \Psi_K(t, T_i, T_n)$

where:
- $\Psi_K(t, T_j, T_n)$ is the price at time $t$ of the K-strike
  European payer swaption, with exercise date $T_j$ on swap from $T_i
  \to T_n$
- $B_K(t, T_0, T_n)$ is the price at time t of the K-strike Bermudan
  payer swaption, with first exercise date $T_0$ on a swap ending at
  $T_n$.
- $C_K(t, T_0, T_n)$ is the price at time t of the $T_0$ by $T_n$ K-strike cap

This shows that the Bermudan payer swaption can in some sense be
considered as the intermediate option between the European payer
swaption and the cap.

* 13.4 Bermudan Swaption Exercise Criteria

** Result

Do not exercise if $y_{T_i} < K$

** Result

We know that $B_K(T_i, T_{i + 1}, T_n) \geq \max\limits_{i + 1 \leq j \leq n - 1} \Psi_K(T_i, T_j, T_n)$

Therefore, do not exercise if

$(y_{T_i}[T_i, T_n] - K)P_{T_i}[T_i, T_n] \leq \max\limits_{i + 1 \leq j \leq n - 1} \Psi_K(T_i, T_j, T_n)$

That is, we do not exercise if the intrinsic value (the value of the
underlying swap) is less than the most valuable of the subsequent
European swaptions.

** Result

Do not exercise the Bermudan payer at $T_i$ if

$y_{T_i}[T_i, T_j] < K$ for any $i + 1 \leq j \leq n$

* 13.5 Bermudan Cancellable Swaps and Callable Bonds

Suppose one pays fixed $K$ and receives libor from $T_0$ to $T_n$, with rights to cancel at $T_i$, $i = j, ..., n - 1$. For spot-starting swaps where $T_0 = 0$, we call this a $T_n$ *noncall $T_j$ Bermudan cancellable swap*.

Bermudan callable bonds are particularly attractive to investors since they typically have a higher coupon than European callable or noncallable bonds.

A *mortgage* is another type of callable bond central to the financial system. A mortgage can to an approximation be considered a purchase of a callable bond by the lender from the homeowner. The homeowner owns a Bermudan option embedded in their mortgage, namely the right to prepay the mortgage, or equivalently owns the right to "call" the bond back from the lender at par. Given the homeowner is paying a fixed rate on the mortgage, their option to prepay (or cancel) such an agreement is equivalent to a Bermudan receiver swaption.
